---
title: "A comparison of flame front extraction algorithms in OH-PLIF images of turbulent hydrogen-enriched methane-air flames"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/talk-1		
venue: "University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering"
date: 2012-03-01
location: "Cambridge, United Kingdom"
---

Hydrogen has harnessed particular attention in the last decade, amid stringent environmental policies and growing sustainability concerns, as a flexible energy carrier of the future. Hydrogen/natural gas blends can be burnt with air in retrofitted combustors which can play a role in reducing carbon emissions while allowing stable operation over a wider range of lean conditions (Bell and Gupta 1997; Schefer 2003). Nevertheless, the addition of hydrogen, a non-unity Lewis number gas, to hydrocarbon fuels can, even at low quantities, alter flame characteristics and affect stability, combustion dynamics, and pollutant emissions (Schefer 2003; Halter et al. 2007). In the presence of turbulence, these flames can experience intense wrinkling leading to the formation of multiscale structures such as islands and pockets. Key geometric information about such flames (local curvature, flame surface density) can be obtained by locating the position of the flame front in planar laser-induced fluorescence or Mie scattering images. The complex flame shapes, multiscale structures, in addition to low signal-to-noise ratios inherent to high-speed diagnostics, pose a certain number of challenges for current contour detectors, which motivates the need for accurate flame front extraction algorithms. 

In this work, we investigate the performance of typical flame front extraction techniques and apply them to high-speed OH-PLIF images of turbulent, premixed, hydrogen-enriched flames in a Bunsen burner. Three different techniques are tested: (a) a threshold-based method (Otsu segmentation), (b) a gradient-based method (Canny’s edge detector), and (c) a multiscale approach (complex wavelets). The differences between the flame fronts obtained are quantified and the algorithms are compared in terms of robustness, computational intensity, and sensitivity to conventional filters. The location of the flame front is traditionally determined from OH-PLIF images by locating the steepest gradients of OH intensity, assuming the OH and heat release peaks are coincident. A fundamental distinction is therefore made between segmentation-oriented (Otsu) and edge-oriented (Canny, wavelets) approaches (Papari and Petkov 2011). Flame fronts obtained using the former should be seen as approximations to flame fronts extracted using their edge-oriented counterparts, which highlight local maxima of OH intensity gradients. This is further demonstrated by the high sensitivity of Otsu thresholding to typical edge-preserving filters (anisotropic diffusion, bilateral filtering), which can yield errors larger than the flame thickness under high filtering conditions. An adaptive contrast enhancement method based on histogram equalisation is proposed to improve the robustness of Otsu thresholding. A combination of low/moderate filtering and adaptive contrast enhancement was found to significantly improve the accuracy and robustness of Otsu thresholding, even at high hydrogen-enrichment. Canny’s edge detector was then used to extract optimal flame fronts. A major limitation of this method, a priori knowledge of optimal thresholds, was partially overcome by applying a mask to the gradient map. The mask was calculated by morphological dilation of the Otsu contour to enclose the regions of interest. A local search method was then used to fill the small gaps in the obtained edges due to low signal-to-noise ratio regions in the OH-PLIF images. The edge linking method travels through pixels of maximum gradients in the 8-neighbourhood while minimising the search angle (Raghupathy 2004, Sweeney and Hochgreb 2009). Finally, a multiscale approach based on the α-molecule framework (complex wavelets) was used for flame front extraction (Reisenhofer and King 2019; Grohs et al. 2016). Although the obtained contours were to an extent comparable to the edges found using Canny, the major increase in computational time and the need for further post-processing using this method was deemed unattractive for large data sets. 

The result of this work highlights the performance of simpler, computationally inexpensive flame front extraction methods, provided that compatible smoothing filters are applied. Issues with contrast inhomogeneities, which often render the use of a global Otsu threshold impractical, can be overcome using adaptive contrast enhancement techniques. The obtained contours can serve as a good approximation with acceptable accuracy when computing location-independent statistics (i.e: global curvature statistics, flame surface densities). When investigations require high levels of accuracy in determining the flame front, edge-oriented approaches such as Canny should be used. The Otsu contour can be used as a tool to locate the relevant Canny edges and circumvent challenges related to hysteresis thresholding at low computational cost.